HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Judy Woodruff is away.
On tonight's "PBS NewsHour": the
tragic fallout
from Italy's earthquake.
The death toll rises to 281,
while aftershocks
destroy bridges, cutting off
access to those
in need.
Also ahead this Friday: inside
the mind of
swing state voters.
We go to the pivotal
battleground of Virginia
to see what residents are saying
about the
election.
MARISSA BAPTISTA, Contractor: I
would say
that I would vigorously support
her.
ALISON KATZMAN, Tax Preparer: He
was drawing
these crowds of ordinary
citizens in.
It got me involved at an
emotional level.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And it's
Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
are here to
analyze the week's news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The U.S. and
Russia neared
an agreement today that aims to
reduce hostilities
in Syria.
Word of the progress came after
an hours-long
meeting in Geneva between
Secretary of State
John Kerry and his Russian
counterpart, Sergei
Lavrov.
Kerry said the deal, if
completed, will make
the possibility of a lasting
truce more likely.
But he conceded there was more
work to be
done.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: In the
next days, our experts will be
meeting here
in Geneva to conclude the few
remaining technical
issues and to move forward in
order to take
the steps necessary to build the
confidence
to overcome the deep mistrust
that does exist
on all sides.
HARI SREENIVASAN: An earlier
cessation of
hostilities failed after
numerous regime and
rebel violations.
Meanwhile, in Syria, one of the
war's longest
stand-offs drew closer to
ending.
Hundreds of residents and
fighters were allowed
to evacuate the Damascus suburb
of Daraya,
which has been under government
siege since
2012.
Secretary Kerry accused the
Syrian army of
forcing them to surrender.
A suicide truck bombing in
Southeast Turkey
killed at least 11 police
officers today.
Another 78 people were wounded.
It happened at a checkpoint just
steps from
a police station near the Syrian
border.
Kurdish militants claimed
responsibility.
It's the latest in a string of
attacks targeting
the country's police and
military.
The Philippine government has
agreed to an
indefinite cease-fire with
communist rebels.
It's aimed at ending one of
Asia's longest-running
insurgencies, a conflict that's
killed at
least 40,000 people since the
1960s.
The deal was the culmination of
peace talks
in Oslo, Norway.
It includes a timetable for
discussions about
political, economic and
constitutional reforms.
A government representative
hailed the agreement.
JESUS DUREZA, Representative of
the Philippine
Government: This is an historic
and unprecedented
event.
Many of us have been here doing
this before,
but I think we're looking at a
very opportune
opportunity that we can finish
off what we
have started a long time ago.
HARI SREENIVASAN:
Representatives from both
sides agreed to return to Oslo
in October
for further negotiations.
France's top administrative
court overturned
a controversial ban on the
so-called burkini
in one resort town today.
The body-covering swimsuit worn
by Muslim
women has sparked a fierce
debate in France.
Martin Geissler of Independent
Television
News has our report from Paris.
MARTIN GEISSLER: These were the
pictures that
divided France and shocked the
world beyond,
a Muslim woman forced by a group
of armed
policemen to remove her clothing
on a public
beach.
The burkini was banned by more
than a dozen
French towns for being overtly
religious.
The law had wide public support,
but activists
from one town took it to the
highest court
in Paris today.
Judges ruled it should be
suspended.
MAN: It's against the civil
freedom of religion,
and now the decision of the
Conseil d'Etat
is final.
MARTIN GEISSLER: As absurd as
this all may
seem, it's important to remember
the context.
France has suffered a series of
terror attacks
over recent months, and the
country feels
embattled and angry.
NICOLAS SARKOZY, French
President (through
translator): I support without
any hesitation
the mayors who have banned the
burkini to
preserve public order.
I ask for a law forbidding it on
the entire
territory of the republic.
MARTIN GEISSLER: There was
little sign of
stress at the manmade beach on
the banks of
the sand today, Parisians
enjoying some late
summer sunshine, no burkinis to
be seen.
But that didn't stop the debate.
"We have been victims of terror
in this country,"
he says, "and the burkini is a
clear symbol
of Islam.
That's why it offends people."
WOMAN: We live in a free
country, so they
do what they want.
If they want to wear something
like this,
it's not...
MAN: It's no problem.
WOMAN: Yes.
MARTIN GEISSLER: These are
extreme times in
France, and many here believe
they require
extreme measures.
But the republic's great
founding values,
freedom, equality and
brotherhood, are being
tested now like never before.
As this country debates the best
way forward,
it's being forced to ask some
difficult questions
of itself.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The human
rights lawyer
fighting the ban said that while
today's ruling
applied to only one town, it
should set a
legal precedent throughout the
country.
Back in this country, the Food
and Drug Administration
wants all U.S. blood banks to
start screening
for the Zika virus.
That requirement had previously
been limited
to areas with active Zika
transmission like
Puerto Rico and parts of
Florida.
Last month, the FDA ordered
facilities in
Miami and Fort Lauderdale to
stop taking blood
donations until Zika screening
could begin.
Republican Donald Trump's
campaign is taking
fresh heat over its new CEO,
Steve Bannon.
The Guardian reported Bannon
registered to
vote in the swing state of
Florida using the
address of a vacant home, a move
that would
violate election laws.
A Trump spokesman insisted he's
moved elsewhere
in Florida.
Meanwhile, various news outlets
revealed Bannon
was charged with domestic
violence in 1996.
He allegedly grabbed his
then-wife's neck
and wrist.
The case was dismissed when she
didn't testify.
We will have more on the
campaign later in
the program.
The federal government will give
Amtrak a
nearly $2.5 billion loan, the
largest in the
history of the Transportation
Department.
It will be used for improvements
on the busy
Northeast Corridor, which goes
from D.C.,
through New York, to Boston.
Amtrak will buy new trains,
upgrade tracks,
and improve platforms.
President Obama created the
world's largest
marine protected area today.
The Marine National Monument is
located off
the coast of his native Hawaii.
It will now quadruple in size,
to span nearly
600,000 square miles.
The sanctuary will protect more
than 7,000
different species, including sea
turtles and
whales.
White House Press Secretary Josh
Earnest explained
why the president felt it was
time to act.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
There is a role for Congress to
play in terms
of setting aside certain
territory, lands
and waters in the United States
for future
preservation.
But we haven't seen a lot of
congressional
activity of any sort really over
the last
few years.
And it has turned the
president's attention
to more robust use of executive
action.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Hawaii's
National Marine
Monument was originally created
a decade ago,
under President George W. Bush.
Federal Reserve Chair Janet
Yellen said the
case for raising U.S. interest
rates has gotten
stronger in recent months.
She spoke at an international
gathering of
central bankers in Jackson Hole,
Wyoming.
But Yellen gave no indication of
when the
Fed might raise rates.
That led to choppy trading on
Wall Street
today.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 53 points
to close above 18396.
The Nasdaq rose six.
The S&P 500 fell three.
For the week, all three indexes
lost a fraction
of a percent.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the shrinking
window for finding survivors of
Italy's devastating
earthquake; voters lay bare
their hopes and
frustrations in the presidential
election;
Mark Shields and David Brooks on
this week's
news; how robots could stop the
invasive lionfish;
and much more.
Three days after a powerful
earthquake hit
Central Italy, the death toll
has climbed
higher to 281.
Rescue operations have been
called off in
some parts, as hopes of finding
survivors
fades.
For an on-the-ground report, we
turn to special
correspondent Christopher
Livesay in Amatrice.
I spoke with him a short time
ago.
Christopher, thanks for joining
us.
The thing with earthquakes is,
it's not just
one quake.
What are the aftershocks you're
feeling?
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY: Well,
everyone is on
edge in the town of Amatrice,
where I'm standing,
but all over this region, they
have been rippling
throughout ever since the
initial quake on
Wednesday, all the way through
just a few
moments ago.
But the biggest one happened at
about 6:30
this morning.
It reached 4.8 on the Richter
scale and it
sent structures around Amatrice
toppling to
the ground, ones that were still
standing.
In fact, the last time I spoke
to you, you
might recall a church that was
standing behind
me.
We actually had to move to a
different location
because that church was deemed
unstable and
the bell tower could have
toppled at any moment.
That's been the case for some
roads leading
into this town, also for a
bridge that was
a central pipeline.
As I was trying to get back into
the city,
I couldn't get past a certain
road because
they were demolishing a hospital
that was
on the brink of collapse.
So that's making the rescue
effort very difficult,
but rescuers, when you talk to
them, they
will tell you that, at this
point, three days
into their efforts, they're
really not counting
on finding anyone alive.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How
significant is it, if
that infrastructure starts to
crumble or is
deemed too unsafe to travel,
that resources,
like people, and goods and
services are getting
through those roads and bridges?
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY: Well, you
would be surprised
by the breadth of people who
have come out
to lend a hand.
You hear accents from all over
Italy, people
from as far north of Milan and
Venice, all
the way to the tip of the toe of
the Italian
boot, shall we say.
But some volunteers come from
even further
afield.
I spoke to a group of Israeli
volunteers who
are lending help as trauma
therapists today.
But then another, even more
surprising group
of people I spoke to, 50
volunteers, all of
them migrants from Africa, when
I asked them
why they were doing this, they
said, look,
we're here to help.
In the same way Italy helped us
in our time
of need, we want to help as
well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Given the
scale of all the
buildings that have collapsed,
who is responsible
for rebuilding or in some of the
cases the
newer buildings, making sure
that they didn't
fall in this earthquake?
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY: Well, there
is sort of
a reckoning that is taking place
right now,
a lot of soul-searching and some
finger-pointing.
In fact, a couple of probes have
been opened
into some structures that
toppled down that
some people believe shouldn't
have.
One in particular in the town of
Accumoli,
which is close to here, that
church tower
came tumbling to the ground.
This was 10 years after an
expensive restoration
process took place on this
church that should
have made it earthquake-proof.
That steeple that came crashing
down killed
a family of four people.
And so now people are trying to
find out who's
responsible for that or if it's
just Mother
Nature.
Another example was a school in
this town
that came crashing down.
That was a public building that,
again, should
have been built up to code and
should have
been retrofitted.
No matter how old these
buildings are, the
question is, can you make
something earthquake-proof
in a part of the country that's
seen seismic
activity since time immemorial?
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Christopher Livesay
joining us from Italy tonight,
thanks so much.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Back in this
country: It's
been quite a week for political
news, with
allegations of racism from both
presidential
candidates, and calls to disband
the philanthropic
behemoth that is the Clinton
Foundation.
As the country watches all of
this unfold,
we take the temperature of the
race.
Our Judy Woodruff sat down this
week with
a group of six voters in
Northern Virginia,
one of the few competitive
states this election
year.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
about the
candidates.
We have been through this pretty
long, some
would say tortured process of
figuring out
who the nominees were going to
be, especially
on the Republican side.
We started out with a big field
of candidates.
It's now winnowed down to Donald
Trump.
Alison, what do you think about
Donald Trump?
ALISON KATZMAN, Tax Preparer:
Early on, like,
I would say last August, I felt
Trump was
going to be the nominee.
There was just something.
He was drawing these crowds of
ordinary citizens
in.
When he did his first Virginia
rally in Richmond
in October, I drove all the way
down there
to the Richmond International
Raceway, and
it was like a huge pep rally or
a rah-rah
revival.
It got me involved in an
emotional level in
a way that none of the other
candidacies,
just listened to somebody on
television, did.
And I also very much liked the
fact that he
was a businessman.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bill Lupinacci,
have you said
you voted Republican for a long
time.
So, what do you make of the
argument that
Donald Trump is somebody with
business experience?
BILL LUPINACCI, Small Business
Owner: I have
disavowed my association with
the Republican
Party for this election, because
I find him
morally repugnant.
I have done business with his
companies.
They have bought our software.
The word on the street is, get
the money up
front.
Other people, other vendors of
his say, get
the money up front.
So he pays us in credit cards
when he has
bought our software, his
companies, not him
personally.
The things that he says in his
rallies to
try to incite violence, to
inflame people
is sickening to me.
I won't have anything to do with
it anymore.
So I'm having nothing to do with
the Republican
Party this year, as are many
other Republicans,
like George Will and President
Bush and others,
saying they're not going to for
him.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marissa, what do
you think?
What is your take on Donald
Trump?
MARISSA BAPTISTA, Contractor:
So, I have three
young children.
I'm actually the PTA president
of a school,
an elementary school of about
800 kids.
We have a sizable portion of
English-language
learners -- we call them ELL --
and then free
and reduced lunch children,
children who are
from a lower socioeconomic
status or group.
And it angers me when people
say, well, we're
wasting all these money on these
children
that are illegal.
They're children.
They want to be educated.
They come here for a better
life.
Like, how do we say, because you
were not
born here or because you were
some type of
anchor baby or just something
that is derogatory
along those lines, that you
don't also deserve
the same opportunities as every
child that's
born here?
ALISON KATZMAN: If those
children who are
coming here illegally had been
born in the
home countries that they belong
in, they wouldn't
be here anyway.
Where do we draw the line?
At some point, we're getting
inundated.
And it's costing such as where I
grew up.
I grew up in Appalachia.
There's poor children there that
were part
of the poor lunch, the free
lunch program
and needed Head Start.
And they're being ignored.
It's like, oh, bless the illegal
immigrant
children, illegal alien
children.
And we're not taking it out on
the children,
but their parents are coming
here, are plotting
to bring them here with the idea
that, oh,
no, we're not going to want to
send them back.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me bring in
Farah here.
You have been hearing this
conversation about
immigrants, illegal immigrants
and other immigrants,
are hurting this country.
What do you think, and as it
connects to Donald
Trump?
FARAH IMAM, School Principal:
There were things
like -- there were drugs, there
were immigration
problems, there was unemployment
long before
this perception of an immigrant
wave.
It's been a long -- it's been
around long
time.
It's the history of our nation,
the history
of our great nation.
And it's kind of what has built
us and brought
us to where we are.
And so I think, when we look at
Trump or any
other candidate, we need to
think of how we
can address those problems and
not just say,
we have to fight this and not do
anything
about it, essentially.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Corey, what about
that?
You have looked at him closely.
You say you're going to vote for
him.
What about that?
COREY SOLVAN, Contractor: Donald
Trump is
very well-educated.
And a lot of his language that's
being spun
into being divisive, I don't
think you will
see these extreme policies come
out of him.
But what you will see is him
using effective
communication tactics that any
effective leader
does and utilizes to actually
bring forward
the issues, so that we can bring
policy into
legislation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marissa, could
that be an explanation,
that he's doing this to shock
people and to
get the conversation going, and
that he's
not going to do this if he's
elected?
MARISSA BAPTISTA: So, that he's
relying on
theatrics and abusing people on
Twitter.
I mean, I work for a large
corporation.
The leaders in my corporation
would never
act the way in which he's acting
on such a
large stage, with him
potentially being the
leader of our country.
I mean, it just would never
happen.
So, I mean, I think...
COREY SOLVAN: If you study,
though, any effective
communicator, leadership,
self-development
professional, they all use these
tactics in
interventions.
They use these tactics in...
JUDY WOODRUFF: What kind of
tactics are you
referring to?
COREY SOLVAN: Powerful rhetoric,
offensive
rhetoric, things that get
people's attention
and allow you to say, wait a
minute, I have
to think about this.
What are my values?
How do they affect the larger
masses of people
outside myself and inside my
circle?
JUDY WOODRUFF: But let me --
Tom, what about
that tactic?
Could this just be a tactic to
get people
talking?
TOM SMITH, Retired Teacher: Yes,
I mean, the
tactic, I would call bullying.
He's really picking on people
who are vulnerable.
And the word repugnant was used
to describe
him.
And I just -- I don't find any
positive values
in the guy.
We talk about his business
knowledge, $650
million in debt.
He's had how many bankruptcies?
That's not the way you run a
successful business.
I don't know what's going to
happen in the
end, but I certainly don't want
that leadership
in the White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Alison.
ALISON KATZMAN: OK.
If you want the talk about
divisiveness, I
would point to the Obama
administration, and
hence Hillary as a subsequent
administration.
I didn't vote for Obama in 2008,
but I thought
maybe it's a good thing we have
got an African-American
president, and it will bring
racial harmony,
and, well, it's time, and even
though I didn't
care for him.
But all he's done is pretty much
sneer and
look down and feel like
Americans who have
been here for a long time, like
myself and
my family, are the enemy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I can see this is
clearly an
election that's bringing up
strong emotions
and reactions.
You're now confronted with two
choices, two
main party choices, Donald Trump
and Hillary
Clinton.
And you have decided to vote for
MARISSA BAPTISTA: Absolutely,
yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why?
MARISSA BAPTISTA: It was
probably because
I didn't like Trump.
I think if there were other
Republican candidates
that were maybe a little more
moderate, then
I could be swayed to vote the
other side.
JUDY WOODRUFF: To vote against
Clinton.
(CROSSTALK)
MARISSA BAPTISTA: To vote
Republican, which
I have never done in the past.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is it about
Clinton?
You sound hesitant?
MARISSA BAPTISTA: It's not
necessarily that
I'm hesitant.
I think I just don't know
enough.
I think we were talking about,
you know, how
much time have you spent just
listening to
sort of the rhetoric or just the
information
that is coming out on TV?
I work.
I have three young children.
So, a lot of my information
doesn't come from
the news.
It comes from what I see on the
Internet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tom, what about
you, as you
look at the choices?
TOM SMITH: I feel like the
economic mess that
we're a part of now goes way
back, and both
parties bear equal
responsibility.
The losers have been the lower
half or the
lower -- at this point, maybe,
90 percent
of Americans, but certainly the
lower half.
And I don't think either of the
choices right
now are going to serve that
lower half.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Clinton or Trump?
TOM SMITH: Clinton or Trump.
But, for me, the power of
appointments is
really critical for the future
of the country,
the Supreme Court, the attorney
general, EPA,
just down the line.
Clinton, I have more confidence
in who her
appointees would be than I --
than if Trump
were president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Farah, what about
you?
FARAH IMAM: I do tend to agree
with Democratic
Party when it comes to social
policy.
When I comes down to if I had to
choose between
Trump or Clinton, I'm
conflicted.
If I had to choose between only
those two,
then maybe I wouldn't vote.
But knowing that I had...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Could you imagine
yourself
voting for Clinton?
FARAH IMAM: Yes.
Yes.
It's just difficult.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why?
FARAH IMAM: There is a lack of
sincerity that
I feel with her.
And I know some people that I
speak with are,
like, oh, you're just saying
that because
she's a woman.
But I'm a woman, too, so it's
not that.
It's, I don't find her
relatable.
I don't feel like she can, even
though she's
a mother, she's a working
mother, she just
-- she has a hard time relating
to a broader
population.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to come
back to you,
Bill.
You're a traditional Republican.
We wouldn't expect you to
support the Democrat.
But did you even give her any
thought in this
election?
BILL LUPINACCI: It's a
possibility.
I doubt I'm going to vote for
her.
I seriously doubt.
But vilifying her and making her
into -- as
the right has done, into this
caricature is
just wrong.
I'm more likely to vote for
neither a Democrat
or a Republican.
I'm looking at both Gary Johnson
and Jill
Stein.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm struck that,
in a state
where Hillary Clinton is
supposedly polling,
I don't know, 10 points ahead,
that there
is no one here who is
enthusiastic for Hillary
Clinton.
Am I hearing you correctly?
MARISSA BAPTISTA: Actually, now
that I think
about it, I think, because of
her position
within the Democratic Party, so
she falls
in lines with things that
typical Democrats
support, pro-choice,
pro-immigration, stronger
restriction on like gun laws, or
tightening
up those gun laws.
So, I think she falls in line
with the Democratic
Party, the platform, so, in
that, I would
say that I would vigorously
support her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Would plan to
vote for her?
MARISSA BAPTISTA: Oh,
absolutely, yes.
TOM SMITH: And I will vote for
her, for sure.
I can't imagine a country run by
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to try to
sum this all
up by asking you all whether you
think it's
possible for the country to come
together,
or are we just destined, at
least for the
next number of years, to be
divided?
Corey?
COREY SOLVAN: I think,
unfortunately, I think
we're looking at four more years
of division.
You would like to...
JUDY WOODRUFF: No matter who is
elected, you're
saying?
COREY SOLVAN: Yes.
Yes.
You would like to hope and wish
for it to
be different, but we have come
so far apart,
it's going to take time to start
healing and
coming back to a middle ground
on everyday
issues that affect all of us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Bill, what do you
think?
Can the country come together
under these
circumstances?
BILL LUPINACCI: What I'm hoping
for, what
I think could be possibly the
best for the
country, is if these
independents get enough
vote, because people are so
disgusted with
both the Republicans and the
Democrats, that
these two independents, Gary
Johnson and Jill
Stein, get enough votes that it
puts the fear
of God into them and saying, oh,
maybe four
years from now, a third party
can win.
It's going to be almost
impossible for them
to win this year.
But maybe it will scare them
enough to say,
one of these parties just might
take it in
four years because the country
is fed up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does anybody see
coming together,
or do we just live with this
division?
FARAH IMAM: This nation was
built on hope
and perseverance and renewed
chances.
And I feel like, no matter what,
we will find
ways to come together again.
We will find topics to come
together again.
I think we're all kind of aching
for it, no
matter Republican, Democrat,
independent.
I think we all kind of need
that, that moment
of unity again, because we're
all kind of
like, oh, my gosh, the ship is
sinking.
But -- so that's -- so, I do
have hope.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right, we're
going to leave
it there.
We thank you all very much.
There is a lot more we could
talk about tonight.
But this has really been a
wonderful conversation
and I thank you all very much.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That brings us
to the analysis
of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks.
Let's start with your reactions
to what you
saw, this group of voters.
MARK SHIELDS: It's always great
to hear the
voices of real voters.
I mean, they're -- you know, we
see polls,
and it's 57 percent, we figure
everybody's
monolithic.
And yet you get -- what you get
is, you get
the texture in the conversation
like that.
And I found Alison really almost
compelling,
the woman who had voted for
Barack Obama in
2008 and really felt that she
and the demographic
of, I guess, white American
voters had been
neglected and forgotten.
I just -- in the past eight
years, and Democrats'
attention to other agendas.
And I just -- I found the voices
just really
revealing.
And most of all, it shows the
lack of enthusiasm
about this election.
When 51 percent of Republicans,
according
to Gallup poll, and 42 percent
of Democrats
say they wish their party had
nominated somebody
else, I think it was reflected
in Judy's session.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, first, I
disagree with
Mark.
I think we are real voters.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Do we not bleed?
DAVID BROOKS: But, yes, I'm
really shocked.
Like a lot of people one runs
across, a lot
of people in that focus group
were -- just
couldn't imagine a Trump
presidency, but found
Clinton distrustworthy.
And then say she wins -- and
according to
the upshot out of my newspaper,
it's like
an 88 percent chance or
something like that.
But say that we go to an
inaugural or we go
into an administration with
someone the country
fundamentally doesn't trust.
And what does that do to the
morale of the
country?
And is there a way she can
become more trustworthy,
where she can reintroduce
herself in some
way, maybe after an election,
not in the heat
of a campaign?
Somehow, it just seems so
dispiriting, if
she does win, that we would go
through four
years where people feel this
personal distrust
for the commander in chief.
That can't be good for the
country, if it
stays like that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Today, there
was even a
tepid endorsement by Bush
adviser Paul Wolfowitz,
saying that he would vote for
Clinton, but
really it just came down to this
choice between
the lesser of two evils.
It seems so much that these
campaigns right
now is positioning about not
that our candidate
is not so great.
It's just that the other
candidate is worse.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
But the last endorsement in the
world that
Hillary Clinton wants at this
point is the
man who made the case publicly
to go to war
in Iraq and admitted that the
argument was
-- consensus argument was on
weapons of mass
destruction, because that was
what everybody
could get behind.
So, the cause -- cause for going
to war was
just, you know, a contrivance.
So, it's not -- Hillary Clinton
probably doesn't
want to be reminded of her
support for that
venture.
And I think she probably now has
enough Republican
foreign policy endorsements.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also this
week, we talked
a little bit about the rise of
the alt-right
movement, the white supremacist
movement.
We have got this week one
candidate calling
the other a racist, and then him
responding
back that she's a bigot.
Where are we here?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Well, I guess we're getting it
out in the
open.
I happen to think Donald Trump's
campaign
began with an act of ethnic
signaling, or
more.
When the San Bernardino thing
happened, and
he wanted to ban Muslim
immigration into the
country, entrance into the
country, that is
-- that was blanketing an entire
ethnic group
or an entire religion.
And that's bigotry.
And so that was the thing that
exploded his
campaign.
And there have been just signals
all along
the way between alt-right and
the Trump campaign.
And it just seems to me there is
always a
danger in every party to be
taken over by
some radical, angry fringe, the
John Birch
Society for the Republican Party
in the 1960s.
Hubert Humphrey was -- spent --
and Eugene
McCarthy and other people spent
a lot of time
trying to get the communists out
of the Democratic
Party in the 1940s.
There was a famous confrontation
in Minnesota
where Humphrey's suit was wet --
was -- he
was spit upon so much, it was
soaking wet.
And parties have to control
themselves so
some vicious element doesn't
take over.
And the Republican Party has not
controlled
the alt-right movement.
And, therefore, it has come into
the movement.
Trump has welcomed it in with a
wink and a
nod.
And it is a long-term problem
for the party.
It is a long-term problem that
you're basically
an all white party.
And so that's just a core
problem that Trump
has now exacerbated and blown
up.
HARI SREENIVASAN: I mean,
Secretary Clinton
might have not called him
specifically a racist,
but she's basically pointed
instance after
another after another where --
and this is
during a week where Donald Trump
goes out
and tries to lure
African-American votes,
Latino votes.
MARK SHIELDS: To be very blunt,
I will state
my case.
Donald Trump has gone to, on a
consistent
basis, the meanest corners of
the American
soul, appealed to the basest and
darkest side
of all Americans.
He began his presidential bid
publicly by
charging falsely, by alleging
libelously that
the president of the United
States wasn't
an American: My people are out
there.
They're finding all of this
stuff.
He began his candidacy with,
they're rapists,
they're murderers, they're
coming here for
that purpose, speaking of
Mexican immigrants
to this country.
David said about the Muslim ban.
He's going to build the wall.
I mean, it's -- everything about
it has been
dark and mean-spirited.
But let me just say one caveat.
And I thought Hillary Clinton
delivered the
speech well.
She wasn't strident.
But this is the worst course for
her to win
a campaign, because you win a
campaign this
way -- and he's not a dog
whistle.
He's a canine choir, OK, of dark
impulses.
But you win a campaign this way,
and you have
agreed upon nothing about where
we are as
a people, what we ought to do
next, what we
ought to think about as the
great challenges
facing our country in the next
generations.
All you have greed upon is that
the person
is unacceptable.
And your political honeymoon,
your presidential
honeymoon basically ends on
Tuesday -- about
midnight of election night.
There is no agreement on who we
are as a people,
what we ought to do as a people.
So, I would just say, if this is
where we're
going in this campaign -- it's
obviously where
he is and where he continues to
go -- but
if she goes that way, and just
to drive him
down further, it's going to be a
terrible,
terrible result.
DAVID BROOKS: I also do think
one has to -- and
she wasn't too guilty of this, I
don't think.
One has to continually
distinguish between
Trump and the Trump supporters.
And it's too easy to say, oh,
they're all
a bunch of racists.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
DAVID BROOKS: Which is -- we
don't know.
And it's probably -- it's not
true in our
experience.
MARK SHIELDS: It's not fair.
Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: It's unfair.
And so I think my answer has
always been,
he's the wrong answer to a right
question,
that a lot of people feel a lot
of anxiety.
They feel they have lost
dignity, they have
lost a role.
And, sometimes, in those cases,
they do go
to a little ethnic tribal fear.
But the way to ease that fear is
not to say,
oh, they're all a bunch of
racists.
And she's not guilty of that,
but it's something
that is floating around in the
conversation.
MARK SHIELDS: Well, she did a
pretty good
job of separating, tactically
and strategically,
the Republican Party, the Paul
Ryans, the
Bob Doles, the John McCains,
that he's an
aberration, he's an anomaly.
I thought that was a
well-crafted part of
the speech.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's talk a
little bit
about immigration.
If you're a Trump supporter, you
call it a
pivot.
If you're a critic, you say this
is a flip-flop,
but what to make of this
particular change
in his stance?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, well, the
change -- the
fact that he's changing stance
is not surprising,
because the man has a severe
problem with
impulse control.
The fact that he was consistent
for a little
while is the odd situation for
him.
The only thing he's been
consistent upon is
narcissism so far.
And so this was him responding
to different
audiences.
And so a new campaign team comes
in, and they
look at a bunch of poll numbers,
and they
see he's not doing well, and
he's especially
not doing well among moderate
Republicans.
They are not doing well among
Latinos.
And so there is this very crude
pander both
on him saying he will be great
for African-Americans,
and then on the immigration, the
pander.
And the crudity of it is what is
so striking.
Here's a guy who actually -- to
the extent
that people really did like him,
or do like
him, it's because he speaks his
mind.
And to throw that away on such a
blatant flip-flop
is a sign not just that he made
some strategic
pivot or something.
It's a sign that he has
attention span problems,
and that he has -- he just wants
to please
whatever audience he happens to
be in front
of at that moment.
And there is just not a lot of
competency
he has shown.
MARK SHIELDS: The defense of
Donald Trump
consistently has been, look, he
may be a bully,
he may be a blowhard, but at
least you know
where he stands, he's not your
typical politician.
You get -- he is who he says he
is.
And he turns out not to be who
he says he
is.
He began the campaign, that was
the raison
d'etre for his candidacy was
building the
wall, and rounding up these 12
million undocumented
immigrants, or illegals, as he
called them,
and banishing them to the outer
darkness of
the netherworld, or wherever.
And now -- now the ban on all
Muslims was
just a suggestion, he says.
Now he's backing off on this.
So, what is it?
To me, I'm always skeptical
about motives,
but I have to look at it and
say, Mitt Romney
carried white women by 56 to 42
over Barack
Obama for his vote.
He's getting murdered among
white women right
now, especially college-educated
white women.
Why?
Because he is who he is.
And it's an embarrassment to say
you're for
Donald Trump.
You can't do it.
You can't look at your kids in
self-respect.
So, to make him somehow, I think
-- make them
less uncomfortable in somehow
supporting him,
I think it's a vote to try and
appeal to the
moderate Republicans David's
talking about
to come home.
It's OK.
He's really not as bad as we
thought he was
or he seemed to be.
See, he's really moderating.
To me, that's what this...
DAVID BROOKS: In this cosmos of
Trump bashing,
I feel like I want to say some
nice thing
about Donald Trump.
And the Wollman ice rink in
Central Park,
which he built, is a fantastic
ice rink.
MARK SHIELDS: It is.
And he built it when it wasn't
being built.
That's right.
DAVID BROOKS: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
let's try to
get through a couple of
non-Trump-related
topics then.
MARK SHIELDS: OK.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Bernie
Sanders' new political
organization about the
revolution had a bit
of a rocky start.
A bunch of his aides decided to
leave en masse
because they were concerned
about the direction
that it was going and who was
leading it.
Does this mean the end of the
revolution,
or is this just a step?
MARK SHIELDS: This means that
putting together
an organization after a campaign
based on
a campaign is always difficult.
It's frequently attempted,
rarely pulled off.
But I don't think there is any
question that
constituency is still there.
This is very much a change
election.
This is a change -- you heard it
in Judy's
piece.
People want a change.
This is not a status quo
election.
The problem is that Trump, we
mentioned him,
represents a change that is
chaos to people
and scary.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
And with Sanders, when you get
an outsider,
you're not going to get --
you're usually
not going to get a lot of
competence.
What you want are insider's
competence with
an outsider's perspective.
And that's a rarity.
Usually, when you get somebody
who has not
been in the system, just putting
together
organizations, a lot of the
management stuff
has not been their bailiwick.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
MARK SHIELDS: Howard Dean did a
pretty good
job after 2004.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
syndicated columnist
Mark Shields, New York Times
columnist David
Brooks, thank you both.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Syrian
conflict is in
its fifth year, making Jordan
home to more
than 1.3 million Syrian
refugees, many struggling
with trauma and the
psychological costs of
war.
With fewer than 100
psychologists in Jordan,
doctors and social workers are
struggling
to fill the mental health care
gap.
University of California
Berkeley journalism
students bring us this story.
It's narrated by Lacy Jane
Roberts.
LACY JANE ROBERTS: The war in
Syria led Nisreen
Katbi to flee her home country
four years
ago.
Now she runs a center in Amman,
Jordan, that
cares for refugees fleeing from
Syria.
They're recovering from the
trauma of war.
Souriyat Across Borders is a
home away from
home for refugees suffering from
both physical
and emotional disabilities.
They get rehabilitative care and
live full-time
at the center, all free of
charge.
NISREEN KHAZNA KATBI, Souriyat
Across Borders:
This is where they have their
physical therapy
training.
LACY JANE ROBERTS: Nisreen and
her staff care
for a rotating group of 30 men,
women, and
children.
The residents can stay at the
center until
they're rehabilitated, after
which many return
to their families in war-torn
Syria.
Nisreen sees people with
amputations, spinal
cord injuries, and head traumas.
But she says the injuries aren't
only physical.
NISREEN KHAZNA KATBI: They faced
some frightening
situations, like the bombings,
the killing,
losing their limbs or had these
severe injuries.
LACY JANE ROBERTS: But Souriyat
Across Borders
has no full-time mental health
professionals
on staff.
So, when a mental health
training project
run by a group of
California-based doctors
came to Amman, Nisreen signed
up.
Dr. Saad Shakir leads CPR, or
Care Program
for Refugees.
At first, CPR's goal was to give
direct mental
health care to Syrian refugees,
but after
seeing the overwhelming number
of people needing
help, they instead began
offering mental health
first aid training to
clinicians, counselors,
teachers, and even legal
consultants, anyone
who works with refugees.
DR.
SAAD SHAKIR, Care Program for
Refugees: While
being a physician, I'm a
humanitarian.
So, seeing all the devastation
going on, it's
like I want to have an impact in
a positive
way.
LACY JANE ROBERTS: Dr. Atef
Al-Qasem is CPR's
on-the-ground partner and
training manager
for the Noor Al-Hussein
Foundation's Institute
for Family Health.
He was eager to partner with Dr.
Shakir after
seeing an increase of refugees
needing quality
mental health care.
DR.
ATEF AL-QASEM, Noor Al-Hussein
Foundation
Institute for Family Health
(through translator):
The goal of the training is to
have anyone
dealing with refugees be able to
provide psychological
first aid; 19 percent of people
we see have
been victims of torture.
We also see PTSD, depression,
anxiety.
All of them need immediately
treatment.
LACY JANE ROBERTS: Dr. Al-Qasem
says that
it is hard to provide individual
treatment,
with so many patients and so few
professionals.
So, he is encouraging caretakers
and mental
health workers to apply group
therapy.
At their field clinic in the
Zaatari refugee
camp, the counselors with the
Noor Al-Hussein
Foundation try to see as many
people as possible
in group therapy.
The camp is one of the biggest
in the world,
home to 70,000 refugees.
Am Sanad Al-Badi works as a
counselor in the
camp, where he says he confronts
mental health
stigmas.
AM SANAD AL-BADI, Counselor
(through translator):
We have a mobile team which make
visits to
refugees to talk about the need
of psychosocial
counseling because the
psychological support
is necessary.
LACY JANE ROBERTS: Once
individuals start
coming to group therapy,
counselors help them
cope with trauma and loss.
AM SANAD AL-BADI (through
translator): Common
trauma we see is loss trauma.
I ask them to remember their
happy memories
and encourage positive thinking
about the
future.
LACY JANE ROBERTS: Back in
Amman, Doctors
Without Borders is treating
refugees who have
been physically disfigured from
Syria, Yemen,
and Iraq.
Dr. Gwenola Ghanes manages the
hospital's
mental health program.
She says there is no way to
predict how people
will react to a traumatic event.
DR.
GWENOLA GHANES, Doctors Without
Borders: On
a psychological point of view,
there is no
rules.
It's not a mathematical
equation.
Most of the people will develop
symptoms such
as depression or anxiety
disorder, and a small
percentage of PTSD.
LACY JANE ROBERTS: Children
especially can
be affected by the trauma of
war.
Talha Al-Ali is a pediatric
counselor.
He works with young victims to
rebuild trust.
DR.
TALHA AL-ALI, Pediatric
Counselor: They start
at the beginning to have the
small social
networks while playing or while
doing activities
together.
Like, a child will start to
adapt again with
building relationships, and
especially to
build trustful relationships.
But to protect them from the
trauma, no one
will be able to protect them
while they are
living in a war.
LACY JANE ROBERTS: After the
training, Nisreen
Katbi says she will be able to
provide better
care for the patient-residents.
NISREEN KHAZNA KATBI: I have
learned how to
deal with certain cases, like if
he is having
constant nightmares, or if he is
aggressive
in a certain way or depressed.
LACY JANE ROBERTS: Dr. Ghanes
agrees that,
while this kind of training is
useful, much
more is needed.
DR.
GWENOLA GHANES: It's useful, but
it's not
enough.
On a humanitarian point of view,
we need to
train a lot of people in a short
time.
LACY JANE ROBERTS: CPR hopes to
return to
Amman once a year.
And Nisreen hopes she will
eventually be able
to train her whole staff.
NISREEN KHAZNA KATBI: This is
the most important
thing for us to do.
We have to raise an awareness
about how to
deal with victims of war.
LACY JANE ROBERTS: For the "PBS
NewsHour,"
I'm Lacy Jane Roberts in Amman,
Jordan.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Lionfish have
voracious
appetites that are upsetting
coral reef ecosystems
from Rhode Island to Venezuela.
But a new nonprofit company has
an unusual
plan to restore balance to those
environments
before it's too late.
In the latest edition of our
online series
"ScienceScope," science producer
Nsikan Akpan
has the scoop.
NSIKAN AKPAN: The lionfish is an
invasive
species.
It's also Darwin's nightmare.
In its native home of the
Indo-Pacific, the
lionfish is a fierce,
unrelenting predator.
In the mid-1980s, exotic pets,
including lionfish,
became popular in the U.S.
Scientists suspect
pet owners eventually dumped
their adult lionfish
in the Atlantic.
The lionfish now threatens
ecosystems up and
down the Atlantic.
But they should watch out.
A new robot is entering the
fray.
Meet the lionfish terminator.
To learn about this robot, we
traveled here
to Bermuda, where we teamed up
with the Nekton
mission.
This 30 scientific organizations
and companies
wants to conduct one of the
largest marine
life surveys in history.
OLIVER STEEDS, Mission Director,
Nekton: These
divers are the first 1,900
meters.
And then these extraordinary
submersibles
go down even further.
We have adapted some with some
of the latest
filming and scientific
equipment, so, we can
sample, we can study, and we can
research,
as welcome as taking scientists
down into
those depths.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Of the earth's
oceans, only
5 percent have been explored.
That means we know more about
the moon than
the water that covers 70 percent
of the Earth.
Nekton wants to fill the
knowledge gap by
making a baseline measurement of
ocean health.
That's because our are facing
threats, including
the spread of invasive species
like the lionfish.
Chris Flook is a collector of
marine specimens
for the Bermuda Aquarium Museum
and Zoo.
And he was one of the first to
notice the
region's lionfish invasion 16
years ago.
CHRIS FLOOK, Bermuda Aquarium
Museum and Zoo:
But then very quickly, I started
to notes
that, over time, we were losing
small fish
from these areas where I
traditionally went
and found lots of small juvenile
fish.
And lionfish were becoming more
and more common.
So, by about 2007, we actually
started a culling
program in Bermuda to tackle
these invasive
species.
NSIKAN AKPAN: Now known as the
Bermuda Lionfish
Task Force, the team holds daily
dives and
fishing tournaments to rid their
waters of
these invaders.
Its members consist of
recreational swimmers,
professional divers and even
local scientists
like Dr. Gretchen
Goodbody-Gringley.
DR.
GRETCHEN GOODBODY-GRINGLEY,
Bermuda Institute
of Ocean Sciences: The lionfish
are a threat
to the ecosystem because, first
and foremost,
they're voracious predators.
So, they consume an exorbitant
amount of food,
more than any other potential
predator out
there right now.
All of the white part is
solidified fat, because
it's unique to lionfish that
they overconsume,
to the point that they get fatty
liver disease.
NSIKAN AKPAN: This is because
smaller fish
in this region don't recognize
the lionfish
as a threat.
They swim right up to it and get
gobbled up.
Basically, the lionfish just
opens its mouth.
It's a big dilemma, because the
task force
can tackle lionfish only in
shallow water.
But in Bermuda,
Goodbody-Gringley has found
most lionfish live 200 feet
below the surface.
That depth is largely
inaccessible to the
average sport diver.
But that's not too deep for a
robot.
Goodbody-Gringley and Nekton
have teamed with
a new nonprofit called RISE, or
Robots in
the Service of the Environment,
that is developing
a lionfish-hunting robot.
GEOFFREY GARDNER, Robots in the
Service of
the Environment: The leading
candidate is
based on an electrofishing
techniques, where
if you put the lionfish between
two electrodes
and apply an electric current,
that current
voltage kills the lionfish or
stuns the lionfish.
NSIKAN AKPAN: The device is in
its development
stage.
And dive teams are testing how
lionfish might
react to a robot arm with two
metal electrode
plates.
The lionfish have few predators
in the Atlantic.
As a result, they're not
conditioned to flee
anything.
Notice here, when the probe
approaches from
behind, the lionfish stay still.
Saltwater is highly conductive,
so it should
act almost like a straight wire
between two
electrodes.
That should keep other nearby
fish from being
stunned.
But is the mass killing of
lionfish ethical?
The lionfish is a pest, but it's
also a living
creature.
We spoke with ocean ecologist
James Morris.
JAMES MORRIS, Ocean Ecologist:
We harvest
fish all over the U.S. and the
planet.
So, I don't think there is
really any ethical
issues with, you know, utilizing
the resource.
But if we're looking for an
ethical question,
it's one around introducing
non-native species
and the impact that it has on
the region and
specifically the biodiversity.
NSIKAN AKPAN: That's it for now.
I'm Nsikan Akpan, and this is
"ScienceScope"
from the "PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now to our
"NewsHour" Shares.
Tonight, an update to a story we
brought you
earlier this year.
Last June, Darius Nabors set out
to visit
all 59 national parks in 59
weeks to commemorate
the Park Service's centennial
anniversary.
We spoke with Nabors on the
National Mall
recently, as he prepared to
finish his tour
at Maine's Acadia National Park
this week.
DARIUS NABORS, Visiting National
Parks: My
name is Darius Nabors, and I'm
visiting all
59 national parks in 59 weeks.
It's been a little crazy.
I have essentially been all over
the country
visiting all the national parks,
and just
spending time in beautiful
places.
So I like to say that I traded
the modern
conveniences of life, like a
microwave and
a coffee maker and things like
that, for beautiful
sunrises, beautiful sunsets and
just beautiful
views of our country.
Most recently, kind of coming
west, I went
from Badlands National Park in
South Dakota,
to Hot Springs in Arkansas,
mammoth cave in
Kentucky, and then all the way
down to Florida,
where there's Biscayne National
Park, Everglades
National Park, and Dry Tortugas
National Park.
There's additionally a park in
the U.S. Virgin
Islands, so we did have to go
out there.
They actually have an underwater
trail.
So they have little signs that
are kind of
put down into the ground that
when you're
snorkeling, you can pass over
them.
The thing I love about the parks
is there's
such -- well, it showcases the
diversity of
the country in terms of geology
or environment.
And so those underwater ones are
just totally
different.
You get to see alligators.
You get to see fish.
You get to see manatees.
So we're going to Acadia last
for our 59th
park, and it's one that I
haven't been to,
so I'm very excited about that.
They always say you got to watch
a sunrise
on Cadillac Mountain, so I will
go and do
that.
It's the first one on the East
Coast, and
so it's kind of special in that
sense.
And then I think, for the trip,
it's been
a trip of going to bed and
waking up with
the sun.
And so it's just going to be
another beautiful
sunrise.
It's wonderful that we have all
59 of these
parks.
I always say that, if you can
get Congress
to agree on something, like the
beauty of
a natural place, then it means
it's pretty
special.
And so I'm just super thankful
that we have
set aside these places for other
people to
enjoy.
Just get out there and see it.
You don't have to go camp in the
backcountry,
like I do.
That's what I love, but I think
it's important
for other people to do the
things that they
love.
If they want to go to an
overlook and look
there, if they want to go and do
a hike, if
they want to spend time with
family or friends,
I think that's the wonderful
part about the
parks, is it provides so many
experiences
for so many people to enjoy it
in ways that
they like.
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online
right now: It's National Women's
Equality
Day.
But a new survey by Forbes finds
that pay
for Hollywood's top female
actresses is much
lower than their male
counterparts.
Find that and more on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
Once again, we turn to our honor
roll of American
service personnel killed in Iraq
and the Afghanistan.
We add them as their deaths are
made official
and photographs become
available.
Here, in silence, is one more.
A reminder about some upcoming
programs from
our PBS colleagues.
A reminder about some upcoming
programs from
our PBS colleagues.
Tonight on "Washington Week":
The presidential
race gets personal, as Donald
Trump and Hillary
Clinton trade accusations of
racism and bigotry.
Plus, Clinton defends her family
foundation
after questions of money and
access.
"Washington Week" will sort out
the week in
politics later tonight on your
PBS station.
And on "PBS NewsHour Weekend"
Saturday: Both
presidential candidates have
pledged to bring
manufacturing jobs back to
American shores,
but have some jobs once thought
to be lost
forever already returned?
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Have a great weekend.
Thank you, and good night.